# StandardDataCollection-LifeTablesFile

The purpose behind this work is to help the community of entomologists and all the insiders involved in rearing insects under different constant conditions in a laboratory environment. The lack of a standard in data collection and sharing led us to create this file, with the hope to endorse the open data practices in entomology.

If you are using this file, please acknowledge us by citing:

_Rossini L, Contarini M, Speranza S, Mermer S, Walton V, Francis F, et al. (2024) Life tables in entomology: A discussion on tables’ parameters and the importance of raw data. PLoS ONE 19(3): e0299598. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0299598_

_Rossini et al. (2024) - Under review, coming (hopefully!) soon_


# How to use/compile the Excel file

**Attention please:** Download the file 'Standard life tables.xlsx' if you want to use it. This file is protected with a password, but it is just a safety trick to avoid accidental modification of the formulas, resulting into potential malfunctioning of the file. If you want to modify the file, instead, you can download the file 'Developer - Standard life tables.xlsx' that is password-free and ready to be modified. We will be very glad if you can communicate with us the changes you may want to introduce to the file, as it may be helpful to the overall scientific community!

**The file is composed of the following tabs:**

- _DatasetOverview_: This tab is fundamental for different reasons. It contains all the information about the species reared, the research group that conducted the experiment, and the definition of the experimental conditions and of the labels that denotes the stages. Proceeding by order:
    - Fill the entomological data about the species;
    - Indicate what the different raw data tabs "Cond-n" indicate. Let us consider a practical example: if "Cond-1" indicates the experiment where individuals were reared at 10°C, the label for "Cond-1" can be 10C. The labels corresponding to the unused tabs, should be left blank or denoted with "--".
    - Indicate the labels corresponding to the different life stages. Note that those labels will be the same you will indicate while inserting the data in the "Cond-n" tabs. For your convenience, the cells of the "Cond-n" tabs will be automatically coloured, so that you can notice if there is a misprint while inserting the data. An example of stage-labels is provided in the Excel file. Your species may have a lower number of stage than the Excel file. Don't panic: just denote the unused stages with "--". The same is applied to adult males in case of parthenogenetic species!
    - You are free to use (in a gooood and exaustive way) the textbox on the right. Here you may indicate the general goal of the experiment as for instance why you reared the species under the different conditions. Moreover, you may provide all the details of the rearing protocol in an exaustive way. This will be helpful for two reasons: the first one is the reproducibility of the results by the scientific community, while the second is for yourself and the manuscript you will probably write after the data collection and analysis. Consider this textbox as a mix between a logbook (it reminds you and your colleagues what you did!) and a materials and method section of a manuscript (and if you do it well, you just need to copy-paste it, in line with the low-energy principle).
- _LifeTables-Statistics_: You may want to see in real time the advance of your experiment and how the data you are collecting are syntetised. On the other hand, at the end of the experiment, you may want to avoid boring analyses to reach out the life tables to copy-paste on your manuscript draft. This is the purpose of this tab, as you can find the life tables statistics corresponding to the different life stages and to the different rearing conditions you explored during your experiments. The calculations come from the _PopulationDynamics_ tab, and they are automatically updated every time you insert new data! Easy, no? We know that you may have some comments or notes that you want to write to take track of the insights of your work with your colleagues and the scientific community. This is the reason why you can find a textbox on the upper part of this tab as well: feel free to use it, and help the scientific community to understand your thoughts!
- _Plots_: Also in this case, you don't need to do anything, because everything is done automatically! Besides number, having plots of the data is extremely important, above all during the data collection and experiment planning. Here, we provide a plot of the stage population dynamics expressed by the differential representation. The stage-populations corresponding to the different rearing conditions are grouped together in the same plot, so that you can easily see the differences and the insights of your study. Note that we divided development and mortality, so that you can analyse them separately. You can adjust the scale of the plot according to your data, just change it according to the Excel settings.
- _Cond-1, …, Cond-15_: Those are the core tabs of the file, the ones you will see often and fill as soon as you have new data. I know that you may be attempted, but please **DO NOT CHANGE THE NAMES OF THE TABS**, as they are recalled by the formulas in the other tabs and everything will stop working. We know that it is hard, but is was the only way to provide something simple and general at the same time. We hope you will forgive us for that! Now, let's see how to compile these tabs. The first thing you may notice, is the same list of labels you defined in the _DatasetOverview_ tab, so that you can easily remind what they mean. The only cell in the header you can directly modify is **E5**, that indicates the sampling time of your data. Note that this value is expressed in **hours**, as some species require inspections with a frequency lower than one day. As soon as you define your sampling range, all the items corresponding to that experimental condition will be automatically converted in days. You may see fractions of days if your sampling time is lower than 24 hours. After the definition of the sampling range, you are ready to use the tab: the days are indicated by the columns, while the individuals correspond to the rows. Fill the cells with the stage you assessed for each individual during the inspection of the climatic chamber, and remember to indicate with "D" (only once) the day the individual is died. This is fundamental, as if you don't indicate the "D", the invididual will not be accounted in the mortality tables you will see later on. The last point concerns the textbox, where you can take whatever note about the experiment: please, be detailed and share as much information as possible! 
- _Individual-LifeHistory_: In this tab you can find the first summary of your data. For each condition, you can find the duration (expressed in days or fractions) of each individual reared. In other words, this tab summarises the raw data you inserted in the "Cond-n" tabs by converting the labels in numbers. For each individual, in fact, this tab is counting how many cells (corresponding to a single time step increase) contain the same label. The same is carried out for mortality, that you can find below the development (at row 1025). In the table of the development you will find only the preimaginal stages, as the adult survival is included in the mortality table. This is just a conceptual division, as talking about "development" does not have any sense for adults (there are no life stages after adults to further develop!). The same conceptual division will be applied to the _PopulationDynamics_ tab as well.
- _PopulationDynamics_: In this tab you can find the second summary of your data, namely the population dynamics (or differential) representation. This representation indicates the number of individuals that at each time step develop to a further stage (or die within the stage), and it is commonly utilised to calculate the stage-durations (as in _LifeTablesStatistics_), or to compute the development and mortality rates (above all in the modelling works). The logic behind the tab is the same of _Individual-LifeHistory_: each table summarizes a given rearing condition dataset, mortalities are from line 388, and adult survival is part of the mortality table, as it conceptually indicates the number of adults that die over time.
- _Cohort-grouping_: We are at the end of the file. In this tab you can find the third summary of your data, namely the cohort (or integral) representation. This representation is the same described by Chi et al. (1985, 1988), with the only difference that mortality is expressed in cumulative form as well (to be coherent!). The tables report, for each experimental condition, the number of individuals that over time are into the different life stages, this is the reason why this time the adults are present in both development and mortality table. Here we have a conceptual distinction, as the number of adults in the development table represents the number of alive adults over time. In the mortality table, instead, the values indicate the total number of adults (similarly to the other stages) died since the beginning of the experiment.

For your convenience, the folder "Examples" contains some examples of dataset acquired using the Excel file. We will be very pleased if you want to provide your dataset as an example, also to support us to spread the news and to involve always more scientists to standardise the data collection of life tables experiments!

Please refer to the cited literature for any further explanation, and if you have any questions/doubts/requests you can write to luca.rossini@ulb.be or luca.rossini@unitus.it.  

